add contentful cms guide (#1565)
withastro/docs: src/pages/en/guides/cms/contentful.md

    - **Contentful delivery access token** - The access token to consume _published_ content from your Contentful space.
    - **Contentful preview access token** - The access token to consume _unpublished_ content from your Contentful space.

## Integrating with Astro

### Setting up credentials

To add your contentful credentials to Astro, create an `.env` file in the root of your project and add the following:

```ini title=".env"
CONTENTFUL_SPACE_ID=YOUR_SPACE_ID
CONTENTFUL_DELIVERY_TOKEN=YOUR_DELIVERY_TOKEN
CONTENTFUL_PREVIEW_TOKEN=YOUR_PREVIEW_TOKEN
```

Now, you should be able to use these environment variables in your project. If you would like to have IntelliSense for your Contentful environment variables, you can create a `env.d.ts` file in the `src/` directory and configure `ImportMetaEnv` like this:

```ts title="src/env.d.ts"
interface ImportMetaEnv {
  readonly CONTENTFUL_SPACE_ID: string;
  readonly CONTENTFUL_DELIVERY_TOKEN: string;
  readonly CONTENTFUL_PREVIEW_TOKEN: string;
}
```

For more information on how to use environment variables, check out [environment variables](/en/guides/environment-variables/).

> Your root directory should now look like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your root directory should now include these new files:
```

  ```
  </Fragment>
</PackageManagerTabs>

Next, create a new file called `contentful.ts` in a `src/lib` directory in your project.

```ts title="src/lib/contentful.ts"
import contentful from "contentful";

const client = contentful.createClient({
  space: import.meta.env.CONTENTFUL_SPACE_ID,
  accessToken: import.meta.env.DEV
    ? import.meta.env.CONTENTFUL_PREVIEW_TOKEN
    : import.meta.env.CONTENTFUL_DELIVERY_TOKEN,
  host: import.meta.env.DEV ? "preview.contentful.com" : "cdn.contentful.com",
});

export default client;
```

The above code snippet is creating a new contentful client and passing in the credentials from the `.env` file. In development mode (`import.meta.env.DEV = true`), the client will use the preview token and preview host. In production mode, the client will use the delivery token and delivery host.

:::caution
While in development mode, your content will be fetched from the **Contentful preview API**. This means that you will be able to see unplublished content from the Contentful web app. At built time, your content will be fetched from the **Contentful delivery API**. This means that only published content will be available at build time. 
:::

> Finally, your root directory should now look like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, your root directory should now include these new files:
```

---
title: Contentful & Astro
description: How to connect your Contentful CMS to your Astro site.
setup: |
    import PackageManagerTabs from '~/components/tabs/PackageManagerTabs.astro'
layout: ~/layouts/MainLayout.astro
---

[Contentful](https://www.contentful.com/) is a headless CMS that allows you to manage content, integrate with other services, and publish to multiple platforms.

## Integrating with Astro

In this guide we will use the [Contentful SDK](https://github.com/contentful/contentful.js) to connect your Contentful space to Astro with zero client side JavaScript.

### Prerequisites

To get started, you will need to have the following:

1. **An Astro project** - If you don't have an Astro project yet, our [Installation guide](/en/install/auto/) will get you up and running in no time.

2. **A Contentful account and a Contentful space**. If you don't have an account, you can [sign up](https://www.contentful.com/sign-up/) for a free account and create a new Contentful space. You can also use an existing space if you have one. 

    :::tip

>     If you have an empty Contentful space, check out [setting up a Contentful model](#setting-up-a-contentful-model) to learn how to create a basic blog model for your content.

Author: I was thinking we may need to modify the `shopItem` model to match our `blogPost` model. I think its pretty common that users may not have any content in Contentful or they just want to try using a CMS, so having this link early may be on their advantage.

```ts title="src/env.d.ts"
interface ImportMetaEnv {
  readonly CONTENTFUL_SPACE_ID: string;
  readonly CONTENTFUL_DELIVERY_TOKEN: string;
  readonly CONTENTFUL_PREVIEW_TOKEN: string;
}
```
Check out [environment variables](/en/guides/environment-variables/) for more information on how to use them.

Your root directory should now include these new files:

```ini title="" ins={2-3}
├── src/
│   └── env.d.ts
├── .env
├── astro.config.mjs
└── package.json
```

### Installing dependencies

Install the following packages with your favorite package manager:

<PackageManagerTabs>
  <Fragment slot="npm">
  ```shell
  # install contentful and @contentful/rich-text-html-renderer with npm 
  npm install contentful @contentful/rich-text-html-renderer
  ```
  </Fragment>
  <Fragment slot="pnpm">
  ```shell
  # install contentful and @contentful/rich-text-html-renderer with pnpm
  pnpm install contentful @contentful/rich-text-html-renderer
  ```
  </Fragment>
  <Fragment slot="yarn">
  ```shell
  # install contentful and @contentful/rich-text-html-renderer with yarn
  yarn add contentful @contentful/rich-text-html-renderer
  ```
  </Fragment>

> </PackageManagerTabs>

Author: I think its very important to have the renderer in here since they are most likely going to need it. Maybe I can expand on what each package does. But at least for me, it took some time to find the right tool to parse rich text 😅.

> </PackageManagerTabs>

Reviewer 2: Okay gotcha. It makes sense to leave it here then, but I think we should describe what it is / how to use it so they're not wondering about it.
Maybe we change that ShopItem example so that the description is rich text and we use this renderer?

    ? import.meta.env.CONTENTFUL_PREVIEW_TOKEN
    : import.meta.env.CONTENTFUL_DELIVERY_TOKEN,
  host: import.meta.env.DEV ? "preview.contentful.com" : "cdn.contentful.com",
});

```

The above code snippet is creating a new contentful client and passing in the credentials from the `.env` file. In development mode (`import.meta.env.DEV = true`), the client will use the preview token and preview host. In production mode, the client will use the delivery token and delivery host.

:::caution
While in development mode, your content will be fetched from the **Contentful preview API**. This means that you will be able to see unpublished content from the Contentful web app. At build time, your content will be fetched from the **Contentful delivery API**. This means that only published content will be available at build time. 
:::

Finally, your root directory should now include these new files:

```ini ins={3-4}
├── src/
│   └── env.d.ts
│   └── lib/
│       └── contentful.ts
├── .env
├── astro.config.mjs
└── package.json
```

### Fetching data

Now that you have your Contentful client set up, you can fetch data from Contentful inside your Astro components. 

> 

Author: I agree. Maybe we can have it in both sections? I like both ideas and I am not sure which one we should keep the tip

> 

Reviewer 2: We need to avoid the "referencing loop": the tutorial section references the setup in the first section as a prereq, so if we pause the setup in the first section to say "check out the tutorial section", we have a bit of a problem! Try and rephrase the first tip to avoid that

```astro
---
import { contentfulClient } from "../lib/contentful";

interface ShopItem {
    name: string,
    description: string,
    price: number
}

> const { items } = await contentfulClient.getEntries<ShopItem>();

Author: yeah, I wanted to keep this code snippet as short as possible but yes I think it's a good idea to cover all our bases.

2. **An Astro project integrated with the [Contentful SDK](https://github.com/contentful/contentful.js)** - See [integrating with Astro](#integrating-with-astro) for more details on how to set up an Astro project with Contentful.

### Setting up a Contentful model

Inside your Contentful space, in **Content model** section, create a new content model with the following fields:

- **Name:** Blog Post
- **API identifier:** `blogPost`
- **Description:** This content type is for a blog post

In this newly created content type, create 5 new fields with the following parameters:

1. Text field
    - **Name:** title
    - **API identifier:** `title`
2. Date and time field
    - **Name:** date
    - **API identifier:** `date`
3. Text field
    - **Name:** slug
    - **API identifier:** `slug`
4. Text field
    - **Name:** description
    - **API identifier:** `description`
5. Rich text field
    - **Name:** content
    - **API identifier:** `content`

Now that you have your Contentful model set up, you can create your first blog post entry. In the **Content** section of your Contentful space, create a new entry with the following parameters:

> - **Content type:** `blogPost`

Author: I think if you have more than one Entry type, you have to choose from the dropdown. But I agree we should remove this.

- **Title:** `Astro is amazing!`
- **Slug:** `astro-is-amazing`
- **Description:** `Astro is a new static site generator that is blazing fast and easy to use.`
- **Date:** `2021-10-01`
- **Content:** `This is my first blog post!`

Feel free to add as many blog posts as you want. Now that you have some data in your Contentful space, switch to your favorite code editor to start hacking with Astro!

> ### Creating astro components

Author: I was thinking about maybe creating a layout as well to make the code for the pages shorter. What do you think?

> ### Creating astro components

Author: I wanted to start easy, with a basic Astro component before moving to the more complicated index page. But yes, my gut feeling was telling me to start with the index page as well. Yeah, I will modify the order of this.

Create a new astro component `Card.astro` inside the `src/components` directory of your project. This component will be used to display your blog post cards on the homepage later on.

:::tip

> Not familiar with `.astro` files? Check out [astro components](/en/core-concepts/astro-components/) for more information.

Author: +1

:::

```astro title="src/components/Card.astro"
---
interface Props {
  title: string;
  description: string;
  url: string;
  date: string;
}

const { url, title, description, date } = Astro.props;
---
<li>
  <a href={`/posts/${url}/`}>
    <h2>{title}</h2>
  </a>
  <time>{date}</time>
  <p>{description}</p>
</li>
```

> Create a new interface called `blogPostFields` and add it to your `contentful.ts` file in `src/lib`. This interface will match the fields of your blog post content type in Contentful and it will be used to type your blog post entries.

Reviewer 2: I think this should be in its own file and named `BlogPost` rather than `blogPostFields`

Author: I wanted to avoid creating more files, but yes I am strongly biased in having a types file.

```ts title="src/lib/contentful.ts" ins={2,4-10}
import contentful from "contentful";
import type { Document } from "@contentful/rich-text-types";

export interface blogPostFields {
  title: string;
  date: string;
  description: string;
  content: Document;
  slug: string;
}

export const contentfulClient = contentful.createClient({
  space: import.meta.env.CONTENTFUL_SPACE_ID,
  accessToken: import.meta.env.DEV
    ? import.meta.env.CONTENTFUL_PREVIEW_TOKEN
    : import.meta.env.CONTENTFUL_DELIVERY_TOKEN,
  host: import.meta.env.DEV ? "preview.contentful.com" : "cdn.contentful.com",
});

```

Now that you have your `Card.astro` component and your blog entries types set up, you can start modifying the homepage `index.astro` in `src/pages` to list your blog posts.

> Starting with the component script section, import the `blogPostFields` interface and `contentfulClient` from `src/lib/contentful.ts`. 
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the frontmatter, import the `blogPostFields` interface and `contentfulClient` from `src/lib/contentful.ts`. 

```

> The `contentfulClient` will be used to fetch your blog posts from Contentful. `blogPostFields` will be passed to the `getEntries` method to type the blog posts response.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `contentfulClient` will be used to fetch your blog posts from Contentful. `blogPostFields` will be passed to the `getEntries` method to type the response as a list of objects with those fields.
```

```astro title="src/pages/index.astro"
---
import { contentfulClient } from "../lib/contentful";
import type { blogPostFields } from "../lib/contentful";

const { items } = await contentfulClient.getEntries<blogPostFields>({
  content_type: "blogPost",
});
```

> Now that you have your blog entries fetched, you can map your reponse to get only the properties that you need. 

Reviewer 2: I think we should describe this differently: we wouldn't need to make a new array that has only the properties we need, because we only refer to the ones we need in the template.

i.e., we could've done this, with no `posts` array:
```jsx
    <ul>
      {items.map((item) => (
        <Card
          title={item.fields.title}
          description={item.fields.description}
          date={new Date(item.fields.date).toLocaleDateString()}
          url={item.fields.slug}
        />
      ))}
    </ul>
```

But this looks annoying, as we have to call `.fields` every time, and convert the date inline. So it's helpful to make a `posts` array, but not for the reason of excluding properties. Maybe:

```suggestion
Now that you have your blog entries fetched, you can map them to their fields and convert the date to a readable string:
```

Author: Yeah, same! I didn't want to clutter the template markup. I guess mapping gives you a nice IntelliSense 😆.

```astro title="src/pages/index.astro" ins={9-17}
---
import { contentfulClient } from "../lib/contentful";
import type { blogPostFields } from "../lib/contentful";

const { items } = await contentfulClient.getEntries<blogPostFields>({
  content_type: "blogPost",
});

const posts = items.map((item) => {
  const { title, date, description, slug } = item.fields;
  return {
    title,
    slug,
    description,
    date: new Date(date).toLocaleDateString()
  };
});
---
```

> Finally, import your `Card.astro` component and write your markup to display the blog posts cards. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Finally, import your `Card.astro` component and write your markup to display the preview cards. 
```

```astro astro title="src/pages/index.astro" ins={4, 20-37}
---
import { contentfulClient } from "../lib/contentful";
import type { blogPostFields } from "../lib/contentful";
import Card from "../components/Card.astro";

const { items } = await contentfulClient.getEntries<blogPostFields>({
  content_type: "blogPost",
});

const posts = items.map((item) => {
  const { title, date, description, slug } = item.fields;
  return {
    title,
    slug,
    description,
    date: new Date(date).toLocaleDateString()
  };
});
---
<html lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>My Blog</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <h1>My Blog</h1>
    <ul>
      {posts.map((post) => (
        <Card
          title={post.title}
          description={post.description}
          date={post.date}
          url={post.slug}
        />
      ))}
    </ul>
  </body>
</html>
```

### Dynamic routes

> To display the content of each blog post, we will use [dynamic routes](/en/core-concepts/routing/#dynamic-routes). This will allow us to create a page for each blog post entry. 

Reviewer 2: We've been using second person "you" so far
```suggestion
To display the content of each blog post, you'll use [dynamic routes](/en/core-concepts/routing/#dynamic-routes). This lets you write a single file that creates a page for each blog post entry. 
```

> Create a new file `src/pages/posts/[slug].astro` and import the following libraries and types:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Create a new file `src/pages/posts/[slug].astro` and import the following:
```

      date: new Date(item.fields.date).toLocaleDateString(),
    },
  }));
  return pages;
}
---
```

With the passed props, you can now write the markup to display the blog post content.

```astro title="src/pages/posts/[slug].astro" ins={21-25,27,29-38}
---
import { contentfulClient } from "../../lib/contentful";
import { documentToHtmlString } from "@contentful/rich-text-html-renderer";
import type { blogPostFields } from "../../lib/contentful";

export async function getStaticPaths() {
  const { items } = await contentfulClient.getEntries<blogPostFields>({
    content_type: "blogPost",
  });
  const pages = items.map((item) => ({
    params: { slug: item.fields.slug },
    props: {
      title: item.fields.title,
      content: documentToHtmlString(item.fields.content),
      date: new Date(item.fields.date).toLocaleDateString(),
    },
  }));
  return pages;
}

interface Props {
  title: string;
  date: string;
  content: string;
}

const { content, title, date } = Astro.props;
---
<html lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>{title}</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <h1>{title}</h1>
    <time>{date}</time>
    <article set:html={content} />
  </body>

> </html>

Reviewer 2: Maybe something like:

> Navigate to `http://localhost:3000/posts/astro-is-amazing/` to make sure your dynamic route is working!

### Setting up credentials

To add your Contentful space's credentials to Astro, create an `.env` file in the root of your project with the following variables:

```ini title=".env"
CONTENTFUL_SPACE_ID=YOUR_SPACE_ID
CONTENTFUL_DELIVERY_TOKEN=YOUR_DELIVERY_TOKEN
CONTENTFUL_PREVIEW_TOKEN=YOUR_PREVIEW_TOKEN
```

Now, you should be able to use these environment variables in your project. If you would like to have IntelliSense for your Contentful environment variables, you can create a `env.d.ts` file in the `src/` directory and configure `ImportMetaEnv` like this:

```ts title="src/env.d.ts"
interface ImportMetaEnv {
  readonly CONTENTFUL_SPACE_ID: string;
  readonly CONTENTFUL_DELIVERY_TOKEN: string;
  readonly CONTENTFUL_PREVIEW_TOKEN: string;
}
```
:::tip
Check out [Using environment variables](/en/guides/environment-variables/) for more information about environment variables and `.env` files in Astro.
:::

Your root directory should now include these new files:

```ini title="Project Structure" ins={2-3}
├── src/
│   └── env.d.ts
├── .env
├── astro.config.mjs
└── package.json
```

### Installing dependencies

> To connect with your Contentful space, install [`contentful.js`](https://github.com/contentful/contentful.js), official Contentful SDK for JavaScript, and [`rich-text-html-renderer`](https://github.com/contentful/rich-text/tree/master/packages/rich-text-html-renderer), a package to render rich text fields in HTML.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To connect with your Contentful space, install [`contentful.js`](https://github.com/contentful/contentful.js), official Contentful SDK for JavaScript, and [`rich-text-html-renderer`](https://github.com/contentful/rich-text/tree/master/packages/rich-text-html-renderer), a package to render Contentful's rich text fields to HTML.
```

  </Fragment>
</PackageManagerTabs>

Next, create a new file called `contentful.ts` in `src/lib/` directory in your project.

```ts title="src/lib/contentful.ts"
import contentful from "contentful";

export const contentfulClient = contentful.createClient({
  space: import.meta.env.CONTENTFUL_SPACE_ID,
  accessToken: import.meta.env.DEV
    ? import.meta.env.CONTENTFUL_PREVIEW_TOKEN
    : import.meta.env.CONTENTFUL_DELIVERY_TOKEN,
  host: import.meta.env.DEV ? "preview.contentful.com" : "cdn.contentful.com",
});

```

The above code snippet creates a new Contentful client, passing in credentials from the `.env` file. 

:::caution
While in development mode, your content will be fetched from the **Contentful preview API**. This means that you will be able to see unpublished content from the Contentful web app. At build time, your content will be fetched from the **Contentful delivery API**. This means that only published content will be available at build time. 
:::

Finally, your root directory should now include these new files:

```ini ins={3-4}
├── src/
│   └── env.d.ts
│   └── lib/
│       └── contentful.ts
├── .env
├── astro.config.mjs
└── package.json
```

### Fetching data

> Now that you have your Contentful client set up, you can fetch data from Contentful inside your Astro components. For example, if the content type in your Contentful space has a text field for a title and a rich text for content your component may look like this:

Reviewer 2: I feel like we should explain where the "blogPost" string in getEntries comes from:
```suggestion
Now that you have your Contentful client set up, you can fetch data from Contentful inside your Astro components. For example, if you have a content type with id "blogPost" that has a text field for a title and a rich text field for content, your component might look like this:
```

```astro
---
import { contentfulClient } from "../lib/contentful";
import { documentToHtmlString } from "@contentful/rich-text-html-renderer";
import type { Document } from "@contentful/rich-text-types";

> interface blogPost {

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
interface BlogPost {
```

    title: string,
    content: Document
}

> const entries = await contentfulClient.getEntries<blogPost>({

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
const entries = await contentfulClient.getEntries<BlogPost>({
```

  content_type: "blogPost",
});
---
<body>
  {entries.items.map((item) => (
    <section>
      <h2>{item.fields.name}</h2>
      <article set:html={documentToHtmlString(items.fields.content)}></article>
    </section>
  ))}
</body>
```

:::tip
If you have an empty Contentful space, check out [setting up a Contentful model](#setting-up-a-contentful-model) to learn how to create a basic blog model for your content.
:::

You can find more querying options in the [contentful.js documentation](https://contentful.github.io/contentful.js/contentful/9.1.34/ContentfulClientAPI.html).

## Making a blog with Astro and Contentful

> In this section we'll use our Contentful–Astro setup to create a blog with Contentful as the CMS. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this section, we'll use our Contentful–Astro setup to create a blog that uses Contentful as the CMS. 
```

- **API identifier:** `blogPost`
- **Description:** This content type is for a blog post

In your newly created content type, use the **Add Field** button to add 5 new fields with the following parameters:

1. Text field
    - **Name:** title
    - **API identifier:** `title`
2. Date and time field
    - **Name:** date
    - **API identifier:** `date`
3. Text field
    - **Name:** slug
    - **API identifier:** `slug`
4. Text field
    - **Name:** description
    - **API identifier:** `description`
5. Rich text field
    - **Name:** content
    - **API identifier:** `content`

Click **Save** to save your changes. In the **Content** section of your Contentful space, create a new entry by clicking the **Add Entry** button. Then, fill in the fields:

- **Title:** `Astro is amazing!`
- **Slug:** `astro-is-amazing`
- **Description:** `Astro is a new static site generator that is blazing fast and easy to use.`
- **Date:** `2022-10-05`
- **Content:** `This is my first blog post!`

Click **Publish** to save your entry. Feel free to add as many blog posts as you want, then switch to your favorite code editor to start hacking with Astro!

### Displaying blog posts previews

> Create a new interface called `blogPost` and add it to your `contentful.ts` file in `src/lib/`. This interface will match the fields of your blog post content type in Contentful. We will use this interface to type your blog post entries.

Reviewer 2: Just a nit, TypeScript interfaces always start capitalized

```suggestion
Create a new interface called `BlogPost` and add it to your `contentful.ts` file in `src/lib/`. This interface will match the fields of your blog post content type in Contentful. You will use it to type your blog post entries.
```

```ts title="src/lib/contentful.ts" ins={2,4-10}
import contentful from "contentful";
import type { Document } from "@contentful/rich-text-types";

> export interface blogPost {

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
export interface BlogPost {
```

  title: string;
  date: string;
  description: string;
  content: Document;
  slug: string;
}

export const contentfulClient = contentful.createClient({
  space: import.meta.env.CONTENTFUL_SPACE_ID,
  accessToken: import.meta.env.DEV
    ? import.meta.env.CONTENTFUL_PREVIEW_TOKEN
    : import.meta.env.CONTENTFUL_DELIVERY_TOKEN,
  host: import.meta.env.DEV ? "preview.contentful.com" : "cdn.contentful.com",
});

```

> Next, go to your `index.astro` file in `src/pages/` and import your `blogPost` interface and  `contentfulClient` from `src/lib/contentful.ts`. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Next, go to your `index.astro` file in `src/pages/` and import your `BlogPost` interface and  `contentfulClient` from `src/lib/contentful.ts`. 
```

> Using the `getEntries` method from `contentfulClient`, fetch all the entries with a content type of `blogPost`. You can pass the `blogPost` interface to the `getEntries` method to type your response. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Using the `getEntries` method from `contentfulClient`, fetch all the entries with a content type of `blogPost`. Pass the `BlogPost` interface to the `getEntries` generic to type your response. 
```

```astro title="src/pages/index.astro"
---
import { contentfulClient } from "../lib/contentful";

> import type { blogPost } from "../lib/contentful";

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
import type { BlogPost } from "../lib/contentful";
```

> const entries = await contentfulClient.getEntries<blogPost>({

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
const entries = await contentfulClient.getEntries<BlogPost>({
```

  content_type: "blogPost",
});
---
```

> The items property of `entries` contains the list of blog posts. You can use the `map` method to iterate over the list and format the response. In this example, we will deestructure the `fields` property of each item and formating the date to display it in a more readable format.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The items property of `entries` is an array of blog posts. You can use `entries.items.map` to iterate over the array and format the response. In this example, we will destructure the `fields` property of each item and reformat the date to a more readable format.
```

```astro title="src/pages/index.astro" ins={9-17}
---
import { contentfulClient } from "../lib/contentful";

> import type { blogPost } from "../lib/contentful";

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
import type { BlogPost } from "../lib/contentful";
```

> const entries = await contentfulClient.getEntries<blogPost>({

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
const entries = await contentfulClient.getEntries<BlogPost>({
```

  content_type: "blogPost",
});

const posts = entries.items.map((item) => {
  const { title, date, description, slug } = item.fields;
  return {
    title,
    slug,
    description,
    date: new Date(date).toLocaleDateString()
  };
});
---
```

> Finally, you can use the `posts` variable to write the markup of your blog posts previews.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Finally, you can use `posts` in your template to show a preview of each blog post.
```

```astro astro title="src/pages/index.astro" ins={19-37}
---
import { contentfulClient } from "../lib/contentful";
import type { blogPost } from "../lib/contentful";

const entries = await contentfulClient.getEntries<blogPost>({
  content_type: "blogPost",
});

const posts = entries.items.map((item) => {
  const { title, date, description, slug } = item.fields;
  return {
    title,
    slug,
    description,
    date: new Date(date).toLocaleDateString()
  };
});
---
<html lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>My Blog</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <h1>My Blog</h1>
    <ul>
      {posts.map((post) => (
        <li>
          <a href={`/posts/${slug}/`}>
            <h2>{title}</h2>
          </a>
          <time>{date}</time>
          <p>{description}</p>
        </li>
      ))}
    </ul>
  </body>
</html>
```

### Dynamic routes

#### Static site generation

> To generate our blog posts pages statically, we will use [dynamic routes](/en/core-concepts/routing/#dynamic-routes) and the `getStaticPaths()` function. This function will be called at build time to generate the list of paths that will be rendered to HTML.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you're using Astro's default static mode, you'll use [dynamic routes](/en/core-concepts/routing/#dynamic-routes) and the `getStaticPaths()` function. This function will be called at build time to generate the list of paths that become pages.
```

> Create a new file named `[slug].astro` in `src/pages/posts/` and import the `blogPost` interface and `contentfulClient` from `src/lib/contentful.ts`. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Create a new file named `[slug].astro` in `src/pages/posts/` and import the `BlogPost` interface and `contentfulClient` from `src/lib/contentful.ts`. 
```

> Inside the `getStaticPaths()` function, fetch all the entries with a content type of `blogPost` using the `getEntries` method from `contentfulClient`. You can pass the `blogPost` interface to the `getEntries` method to type your response. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Inside the `getStaticPaths()` function, fetch all the entries with a content type of `blogPost` using the `getEntries` method from `contentfulClient`. Pass the `BlogPost` interface to the `getEntries` generic to type the response. 
```

```astro title="src/pages/posts/[slug].astro"
---
import { contentfulClient } from "../../lib/contentful";
import type { blogPostFields } from "../../lib/contentful";

export async function getStaticPaths() {
  const entries = await contentfulClient.getEntries<blogPost>({
    content_type: "blogPost",
  });
}
---
```

> The items property of `entries` contains a list of blog posts. We will use the `map` method to iterate over the list and return a list of pages. Each page will be an object with a `params` and `props` property. The `params` property will be used to generate the URL of the page and the `props` property will be passed to the page component as props.

Reviewer 2: This paragraph mostly describes the code (rather than explaining a deeper concept behind it), and it's harder to follow without looking at the code, so I think it's worth shortening it:
```suggestion
Then, map each item to an object with a `params` and `props` property. The `params` property will be used to generate the URL of the page and the `props` property will be passed to the page component as props.
```

```astro title="src/pages/posts/[slug].astro" ins={3,11-19}
---
import { contentfulClient } from "../../lib/contentful";
import { documentToHtmlString } from "@contentful/rich-text-html-renderer";
import type { blogPostFields } from "../../lib/contentful";

export async function getStaticPaths() {
  const entries = await contentfulClient.getEntries<blogPostFields>({
    content_type: "blogPost",
  });

  const pages = entries.items.map((item) => ({
    params: { slug: item.fields.slug },
    props: {
      title: item.fields.title,
      content: documentToHtmlString(item.fields.content),
      date: new Date(item.fields.date).toLocaleDateString(),
    },
  }));
  return pages;
}
---
```

> In this example, the `params` property is an object with a `slug` property. The property inside `params` should match the name of the dynamic route (i.e `[slug].astro`).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`slug`, the property inside `params`, matches the name of the dynamic route ( `[slug].astro`).
```

> The `props` property is an object with the properties: title, content and date. We will use the `documentToHtmlString` method to convert the `content` property from a Document to a string of HTML and the Date constructor to format the date.

Reviewer 2: Since we already did this, it doesn't make sense to use future tense. Also, the power of a list for readability!
```suggestion
The `props` object passes three properties to the page:
- title (a string)
- content (a rich text Document converted to HTML using `documentToHtmlString`)
- date (formatted using the `Date` constructor)
```

Finally, you can use the page `props` to display your blog post.

```astro title="src/pages/posts/[slug].astro" ins={21,23-32}
---
import { contentfulClient } from "../../lib/contentful";
import { documentToHtmlString } from "@contentful/rich-text-html-renderer";
import type { blogPost } from "../../lib/contentful";

export async function getStaticPaths() {
  const { items } = await contentfulClient.getEntries<blogPost>({
    content_type: "blogPost",
  });
  const pages = items.map((item) => ({
    params: { slug: item.fields.slug },
    props: {
      title: item.fields.title,
      content: documentToHtmlString(item.fields.content),
      date: new Date(item.fields.date).toLocaleDateString(),
    },
  }));
  return pages;
}

const { content, title, date } = Astro.props;
---
<html lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>{title}</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <h1>{title}</h1>
    <time>{date}</time>
    <article set:html={content} />
  </body>
</html>
```

Navigate to http://localhost:3000/posts/astro-is-amazing/ to make sure your dynamic route is working!

#### Server side rendering

> To render a blog post on the server, you will use the frontmatter to request the data from Contentful and pass it to the page as props.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you've [opted in to SSR mode](en/guides/server-side-rendering/#enabling-ssr-in-your-project), you will use a dynamic route that uses a `slug` parameter to fetch the data from Contentful.
```

> Import the `blogPost` interface and `contentfulClient` from `src/lib/contentful.ts`. Use the dynamic route parameter `slug` and the `getEntries` method from `contentfulClient` to fetch the desired entry with a content type of `blogPost` and a slug that matches the dynamic route parameter.
> 
> You can use the [`Astro.params`](/en/core-concepts/routing/#the-astroparams-object) object to get the parameters from the URL. 

Reviewer 2: This is also hard to follow without the code; I think we can jump straight to it, especially since we explained the setup in the section before the tutorial:

```suggestion
Create a `[slug].astro` page in `src/pages/posts`. Use [`Astro.params`](/en/core-concepts/routing/#the-astroparams-object) to get the slug from the URL, then pass that to `getEntries`: 
```

```astro title="src/pages/posts/[slug].astro"
---
import { contentfulClient } from "../../lib/contentful";

> import type { blogPost } from "../../lib/contentful";
> 
> const { slug } = Astro.params;
> 
> const data = await contentfulClient.getEntries<blogPost>({

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
import type { BlogPost } from "../../lib/contentful";

const { slug } = Astro.params;

const data = await contentfulClient.getEntries<BlogPost>({
```

  content_type: "blogPost",
  "fields.slug": slug,
});
---
```

> To handle errors or missmatched slugs, you can use the `try/catch` statement. If the entry is not found, you can redirect the user to the 404 page using the [`Astro.response`](/en/reference/api-reference/#astroresponse) API.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the entry is not found, you can redirect the user to the 404 page using [`Astro.redirect`](/en/guides/server-side-rendering/#astroredirect).
```

```astro title="src/pages/posts/[slug].astro" ins={7, 12-13}
---
import { contentfulClient } from "../../lib/contentful";

> import type { blogPost } from "../../lib/contentful";
> 
> const { slug } = Astro.params;
> 
> try {
>   const data = await contentfulClient.getEntries<blogPost>({
>     content_type: "blogPost",
>     "fields.slug": slug,
>   });
> } catch (error) {
>   Astro.redirect("/404");

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
import type { BlogPost } from "../../lib/contentful";

const { slug } = Astro.params;

try {
  const data = await contentfulClient.getEntries<BlogPost>({
    content_type: "blogPost",
    "fields.slug": slug,
  });
} catch (error) {
  return Astro.redirect("/404");
```

}
---
```

> Next, we will format the data to be passed to the page. In this example we will use the `documentToHtmlString` method to convert the `content` property from a Document to a string of HTML and the Date constructor to format the date.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Next, use `documentToHtmlString` to convert the `content` property from a Document to HTML and the Date constructor to format the date:
```

```astro title="src/pages/posts/[slug].astro" ins={7,14-19}
---
import Layout from "../../layouts/Layout.astro";
import { contentfulClient } from "../../lib/contentful";
import { documentToHtmlString } from "@contentful/rich-text-html-renderer";
import type { blogPost } from "../../lib/contentful";

let post;
const { slug } = Astro.params;
try {
  const data = await contentfulClient.getEntries<blogPost>({
    content_type: "blogPost",
    "fields.slug": slug,
  });
  const { title, date, content } = data.items[0].fields;
  post = {
    title,
    date: new Date(date).toLocaleDateString(),
    content: documentToHtmlString(content),
  };
} catch (error) {
  Astro.redirect("/404");
}
---
```
  

> Finally, you can use the `post` variable to display your blog post in the template section.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Finally, you can reference `post` to display your blog post in the template section.
```

```astro title="src/pages/posts/[slug].astro" ins={24-33}
---
import Layout from "../../layouts/Layout.astro";
import { contentfulClient } from "../../lib/contentful";
import { documentToHtmlString } from "@contentful/rich-text-html-renderer";
import type { blogPost } from "../../lib/contentful";

let post;
const { slug } = Astro.params;
try {
  const data = await contentfulClient.getEntries<blogPost>({
    content_type: "blogPost",
    "fields.slug": slug,
  });
  const { title, date, content } = data.items[0].fields;
  post = {
    title,
    date: new Date(date).toLocaleDateString(),
    content: documentToHtmlString(content),
  };
} catch (error) {
  Astro.redirect("/404");
}
---
<html lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>{post?.title}</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <h1>{post?.title}</h1>
    <time>{post?.date}</time>
    <article set:html={post?.content} />
  </body>
</html>
```

### Webhooks

> If your project is generated using SSG (Static Site Generation), you will need to set up a webhook to trigger a new build when your content changes. Netlify and Vercel provide a webhook feature that you can use to trigger a new build from Contentful. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If your project is using Astro's default static mode, you will need to set up a webhook to trigger a new build when your content changes. Netlify and Vercel provide a webhook feature that you can use to trigger a new build from Contentful. 
```

Click **Publish** to save your entry. Feel free to add as many blog posts as you want, then switch to your favorite code editor to start hacking with Astro!

### Displaying blog posts previews

Create a new interface called `BlogPost` and add it to your `contentful.ts` file in `src/lib/`. This interface will match the fields of your blog post content type in Contentful. You will use it to type your blog post entries.

```ts title="src/lib/contentful.ts" ins={2,4-10}
import contentful from "contentful";
import type { Document } from "@contentful/rich-text-types";

export interface BlogPost {
  title: string;
  date: string;
  description: string;
  content: Document;
  slug: string;
}

export const contentfulClient = contentful.createClient({
  space: import.meta.env.CONTENTFUL_SPACE_ID,
  accessToken: import.meta.env.DEV
    ? import.meta.env.CONTENTFUL_PREVIEW_TOKEN
    : import.meta.env.CONTENTFUL_DELIVERY_TOKEN,
  host: import.meta.env.DEV ? "preview.contentful.com" : "cdn.contentful.com",
});

```

Next, go to your `index.astro` file in `src/pages/` and import your `BlogPost` interface and  `contentfulClient` from `src/lib/contentful.ts`. 

> Using the `getEntries` method from `contentfulClient`, fetch all the entries with a content type of `blogPost`. Pass the `BlogPost` interface to the `getEntries` generic to type your response. 

Author: Yes, I think I went too far in some descriptions. +1 on the shorter version.

```astro title="src/pages/index.astro"
---
import { contentfulClient } from "../lib/contentful";
import type { BlogPost } from "../lib/contentful";

const entries = await contentfulClient.getEntries<BlogPost>({
  content_type: "blogPost",
});
---
```

> The items property of `entries` is an array of blog posts. You can use `entries.items.map` to iterate over the array and format the response. In this example, we will destructure the `fields` property of each item and reformat the date to a more readable format.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This fetch call will return an array of your blog posts at `entries.items`. Use can use `map()` to create a new array (`posts`)  that formats your returned data.

The example below returns the `items.fields` properites from our Content model to create a blog post preview, and at the same time, reformats the date to a more readable format.
```
I don't think the text here has to be quite so jargony. I think it's ok just to describe what is happening at the user level, not the technical term level. Something like the above maybe?

  content_type: "blogPost",
});

const posts = entries.items.map((item) => {
  const { title, date, description, slug } = item.fields;
  return {
    title,
    slug,
    description,
    date: new Date(date).toLocaleDateString()
  };
});
---
```

Finally, you can use `posts` in your template to show a preview of each blog post.

```astro astro title="src/pages/index.astro" ins={19-37}
---
import { contentfulClient } from "../lib/contentful";
import type { blogPost } from "../lib/contentful";

const entries = await contentfulClient.getEntries<blogPost>({
  content_type: "blogPost",
});

const posts = entries.items.map((item) => {
  const { title, date, description, slug } = item.fields;
  return {
    title,
    slug,
    description,
    date: new Date(date).toLocaleDateString()
  };
});
---
<html lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>My Blog</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <h1>My Blog</h1>
    <ul>
      {posts.map((post) => (
        <li>
          <a href={`/posts/${slug}/`}>
            <h2>{title}</h2>
          </a>
          <time>{date}</time>
          <p>{description}</p>
        </li>
      ))}
    </ul>
  </body>
</html>
```

> ### Dynamic routes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Dynamic routes

Use the same method to fetch data your data from Contentful as above, but this time, on a page that will create a unique page route for each blog post.

```
I think it might be useful to point out somehow that a lot of this will look familar, since the fetch call is very similar! This also allows us to do some referring back vs reiterate the exact same thing again.

#### Static site generation

If you're using Astro's default static mode, you'll use [dynamic routes](/en/core-concepts/routing/#dynamic-routes) and the `getStaticPaths()` function. This function will be called at build time to generate the list of paths that become pages.

> Create a new file named `[slug].astro` in `src/pages/posts/` and import the `BlogPost` interface and `contentfulClient` from `src/lib/contentful.ts`. 
> 
> Inside the `getStaticPaths()` function, fetch all the entries with a content type of `blogPost` using the `getEntries` method from `contentfulClient`. Pass the `BlogPost` interface to the `getEntries` generic to type the response. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a new file named `[slug].astro` in `src/pages/posts/`.

As you did on `index.astro`, import the `BlogPost` interface and `contentfulClient` from `src/lib/contentful.ts`. 

This time, fetch your data inside a `getStaticPaths()` function.
```

---
import { contentfulClient } from "../../lib/contentful";
import type { blogPostFields } from "../../lib/contentful";

export async function getStaticPaths() {
  const entries = await contentfulClient.getEntries<blogPost>({
    content_type: "blogPost",
  });
}
---
```

Then, map each item to an object with a `params` and `props` property. The `params` property will be used to generate the URL of the page and the `props` property will be passed to the page component as props.

```astro title="src/pages/posts/[slug].astro" ins={3,11-19}
---
import { contentfulClient } from "../../lib/contentful";
import { documentToHtmlString } from "@contentful/rich-text-html-renderer";
import type { blogPostFields } from "../../lib/contentful";

export async function getStaticPaths() {
  const entries = await contentfulClient.getEntries<blogPostFields>({
    content_type: "blogPost",
  });

  const pages = entries.items.map((item) => ({
    params: { slug: item.fields.slug },
    props: {
      title: item.fields.title,
      content: documentToHtmlString(item.fields.content),
      date: new Date(item.fields.date).toLocaleDateString(),
    },
  }));
  return pages;
}
---
```

> `slug`, the property inside `params`, matches the name of the dynamic route ( `[slug].astro`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The property inside `params` must match the name of the dynamic route. Since our filename is `[slug].astro`, we use `slug`.
```

> The `props` object passes three properties to the page:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In our example, the `props` object passes three properties to the page:
```

Create a `[slug].astro` page in `src/pages/posts`. Use [`Astro.params`](/en/core-concepts/routing/#the-astroparams-object) to get the slug from the URL, then pass that to `getEntries`: 

```astro title="src/pages/posts/[slug].astro"
---
import { contentfulClient } from "../../lib/contentful";
import type { BlogPost } from "../../lib/contentful";

const { slug } = Astro.params;

const data = await contentfulClient.getEntries<BlogPost>({
  content_type: "blogPost",
  "fields.slug": slug,
});
---
```

If the entry is not found, you can redirect the user to the 404 page using [`Astro.redirect`](/en/guides/server-side-rendering/#astroredirect).

```astro title="src/pages/posts/[slug].astro" ins={7, 12-13}
---
import { contentfulClient } from "../../lib/contentful";
import type { BlogPost } from "../../lib/contentful";

const { slug } = Astro.params;

try {
  const data = await contentfulClient.getEntries<BlogPost>({
    content_type: "blogPost",
    "fields.slug": slug,
  });
} catch (error) {
  return Astro.redirect("/404");
}
---
```

> Next, use `documentToHtmlString` to convert the `content` property from a Document to HTML and the Date constructor to format the date:

Reviewer: Post is new here, but you haven't talked about it or highlighted it, only mentioned these two conversions. I think you need to say where `post` came from and what it's doing here.

Then, below "referencing post" makes more sense.

```suggestion
Next, use `documentToHtmlString` to convert the `content` property from a Document to HTML, and use the Date constructor to format the date:
```

```astro title="src/pages/posts/[slug].astro" ins={7,14-19}
---
import Layout from "../../layouts/Layout.astro";
import { contentfulClient } from "../../lib/contentful";
import { documentToHtmlString } from "@contentful/rich-text-html-renderer";
import type { blogPost } from "../../lib/contentful";

let post;
const { slug } = Astro.params;
try {
  const data = await contentfulClient.getEntries<blogPost>({
    content_type: "blogPost",
    "fields.slug": slug,
  });
  const { title, date, content } = data.items[0].fields;
  post = {
    title,
    date: new Date(date).toLocaleDateString(),
    content: documentToHtmlString(content),
  };
} catch (error) {

>   Astro.redirect("/404");

Author: ```suggestion
  return Astro.redirect("/404");
```

}
---
```
  
Finally, you can reference `post` to display your blog post in the template section.

```astro title="src/pages/posts/[slug].astro" ins={24-33}
---
import Layout from "../../layouts/Layout.astro";
import { contentfulClient } from "../../lib/contentful";
import { documentToHtmlString } from "@contentful/rich-text-html-renderer";
import type { blogPost } from "../../lib/contentful";

let post;
const { slug } = Astro.params;
try {
  const data = await contentfulClient.getEntries<blogPost>({
    content_type: "blogPost",
    "fields.slug": slug,
  });
  const { title, date, content } = data.items[0].fields;
  post = {
    title,
    date: new Date(date).toLocaleDateString(),
    content: documentToHtmlString(content),
  };
} catch (error) {

>   Astro.redirect("/404");

Author: ```suggestion
  return Astro.redirect("/404");
```

}
---
<html lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>{post?.title}</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <h1>{post?.title}</h1>
    <time>{post?.date}</time>
    <article set:html={post?.content} />
  </body>
</html>
```

> ### Webhooks

Reviewer: I get that Webhooks is what you're describing, BUT what's the user's actual task here? Publishing/deploying? I think THAT should be the heading, and then the paragraph below makes sense, but slightly rephrased to include the word publishing/deploy since we're focusing on what the user wants to do (have a working website!) not the technical hurdle they need to overcome (webhook)

</html>
```

### Publishing your site

> To deploy your website, visit our [deployment guides](/en/guides/deploy) and follow the instructions for your preferred hosting provider. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To deploy your website, visit our [deployment guides](/en/guides/deploy/) and follow the instructions for your preferred hosting provider. 
```
